I.


When Gregor Samsa woke up from troubled dreams one morning, he found
turns into a monstrous vermin in his bed. He laid
on his armored back and saw if he turned his head a little
raised, its arched, brown, arched stiffeners
divided belly, at the level of which the duvet is, to the whole
Ready to slide down, could hardly get it. Its many, im
Compared to the rest of his size, pitifully thin legs flickered
helpless before his eyes.

"What happened to me?" He thought. It wasn't a dream. His room,
a real human room, just a little too small, lay quietly between
the four well-known walls. Above the table on one of them
unpacked sample collection of cloth goods was spread out -
Samsa was a traveler - the picture he recently hung from a
illustrated magazine cut out and in a pretty,
gilded frame. It represented a lady who,
with a fur hat and a fur boa, sat upright and one
heavy fur muff into which her entire forearm had disappeared, that
Raised to the viewer.

Gregor's gaze then turned to the window, and the cloudy weather -
raindrops could be heard hitting the window sill - made it
very melancholy. “How about I do a little more
go on sleeping and forget all follies, 'he thought, but that was true
Totally impracticable because he was used to being on the right side too
sleep, but could not get into his current state
bring this situation. With whatever strength he moved on the right side
threw, again and again he rocked back into the supine position. He tried
it probably a hundred times, closed my eyes, not about the wriggling legs
to have to see, and only let off when he never got in the side
began to feel felt, light, dull pain.

“Oh God,” he thought, “what a strenuous job I have
chosen! Day out, day in on the journey. The business excitement
are much bigger than in the actual home business, and besides
I still have this plague of traveling, worrying about them
Train connections, the irregular, bad food, one always
changing, never lasting, never becoming more cordial human
Traffic. Let the devil get it all! ”He felt a slight itch
on top of the stomach; slowly pushed himself closer to the on his back
Bed posts to make it easier to lift your head; found the itchy one
Place that was filled with lots of little white dots that he
did not know how to judge; and wanted the spot with one leg
feel, but immediately pulled it back, because the touch blew around him
Chill.

It slipped back into its previous position. “This early one
Getting up, "he thought," makes you very stupid. Man must
have his sleep. Other travelers live like harem women. If I
For example, going back to the inn in the morning to see the
Overwriting received orders, these gentlemen are only at the office
Breakfast. I should try that with my boss; I would be on the
Fly out of the spot. By the way, who knows if that's not very good for me
were. If I didn't hold back about my parents, I would have
I quit long ago, I would have stood in front of the boss and gave him mine
Opinion from the bottom of the heart. He would have fallen from the desk
have to! It's also a strange way to sit on the desk and
to talk down to the clerk from the heights and, moreover, because of the
The boss's hearing loss must come very close. Well hope
has not yet given up completely, once I have the money together,
to pay off his parents' debt to him - it should be five to
last six years - I definitely do it. Then the
made great cut. For the time being, however, I have to get up because mine
The train leaves at five. "

And he looked over at the alarm clock ticking on the box. “Heavenly
He thought. It was six thirty and the hands went quietly
forward, it was even half over, it was already three-quarters of the way.
Shouldn't the alarm have gone off? You could see from the bed that he was up
four o'clock was set correctly; surely he had rang the bell too. Yes but
was it possible to sleep through this furniture-shaking bell?
Well, he hadn't slept quietly, but probably all the more
more solid. But what should he do now? The next train left at seven
Clock; he would have had to hurry in a nonsensical hurry to catch up with him, and the
The collection wasn't packed yet, and he himself felt quite well
not particularly fresh and agile. And even if he's the train
caught up, a thunderstorm from the boss was inevitable, because the
Business servant had been waiting by the five o'clock train and the message from
his failure has long since been reimbursed. It was a creature of the boss without
Backbone and mind. What if he called in sick? That would
but extremely embarrassing and suspicious, because Gregor was during his
five years of service not even been sick. Certainly he would
Boss come to the health insurance doctor, the parents would be lazy because of the
Son's reproach and all objections by pointing out the
Cut off the health insurance doctor, for whom it is only very healthy,
but there are work-shy people. And, by the way, in this case it would have
so completely wrong? Gregor actually felt apart from one
really superfluous sleepiness after a long sleep, quite well
and was even very hungry.

When he considered all of this in a hurry, without making up his mind
get out of bed - the alarm clock has just struck three quarters
seven - there was a cautious knock on the door at the head of his bed.
"Gregor," cried - it was his mother - "it is a quarter to seven.
Didn't you want to go away? ”The soft voice! Gregor was startled when he
heard his answering voice, which was unmistakably his earlier one,
but into which, as if from below, there is a
painful beeping mixed up, the words literally only in the first
Moment left in their clarity, in order to echo them in such a way
destroy so that one did not know whether one had heard correctly. Gregor had
want to answer in detail and explain everything, but limited
under the circumstances, to say: "Yes, yes, thank you, mother, I am standing
already open. ”As a result of the wooden door, the change was in Gregor's voice
Probably not noticeable outside, because the mother calmed down with this
Explanation and slurped away. But through the little conversation they were
other family members became aware that Gregor was against
I was expecting to be home, and already knocked on the side door of the
Father, weak, but with a fist. “Gregor, Gregor,” he cried, “what is it
because? ”And after a little while he warned again with a deeper one
Voice: »Gregor! Gregor! ”But at the other side door she complained softly
Sister: “Gregor? Are you not well? Do you need anything? ”After both
Gregor replied to the sides: "I'm already done," and tried to
through the most careful pronunciation and the inclusion of long ones
Pauses between the individual words of his voice all conspicuous
to take. The father returned to his breakfast too, the sister
but whispered: "Gregor, open up, I swear to you." But Gregor
did not even think of opening, but praised her for traveling
Caution assumed, even at home all doors during the night
block.

At first he wanted to get up quietly and undisturbed, get dressed and walk in front
Eat everything breakfast, and only then think about the rest, because, that noticed
he probably would, in bed he wouldn’t come to a sensible end to the thought
come. He remembered, maybe someone in bed several times
felt slight pain caused by awkward lying down
which then turned out to be pure imagination when getting up,
and he was curious to see how his ideas for today would gradually change
would dissolve. That the change in voice was nothing else than
the harbinger of a severe cold, an occupational disease of the
Travelers, he had no doubt of that.

Throwing off the blanket was easy; he only needed himself a little
inflate and it fell by itself. But it was still difficult
especially because it was so incredibly wide. He would have arms and hands
used to straighten up; but instead he only had that
many little legs that move continuously in the most varied of movements
and which, moreover, he could not control. Did he want one
buckle once, it was the first thing that he stretched; and succeeded
it finally allows him to do what he wanted with this leg, like that
meanwhile all the others worked, as if released, at the highest,
painful excitement. "Just don't linger in bed uselessly,"
Gregor said to himself.

At first he wanted to get out of bed with the lower part of his body
get out, but this lower part, by the way, he hasn't yet
had seen and of which he had no real idea
could, turned out to be too difficult to move; it went so slowly; and as
he finally, almost gone wild, with gathered strength, without
Consideration pushed forward, if he had chosen the wrong direction,
hit the lower bedpost violently, and the burning pain,
which he felt, taught him that just the lower part of his body
Perhaps the most sensitive at the moment.

So he tried to get his upper body out of bed first,
and carefully turned his head to the edge of the bed. This was also easy
and in spite of its width and heaviness, body mass finally followed
slowly turning the head. But when he finally got his head outside
Keeping the bed in the open air, he was afraid to continue on this
Advance wisely, because if he finally let himself go like that, he had to
Downright miracles happen when the head doesn't get hurt
should. And right now he was not allowed to regain consciousness at any price
lose; he would rather stay in bed.

But when he lay there sighing again after the same effort as before,
and again saw his legs fight each other even worse
and found no way to find peace and order in this arbitrariness
he told himself again that he couldn't possibly stay in bed
and that the most sensible thing to do is to sacrifice everything, if only that
There would be the slightest hope of breaking free from bed.
At the same time, however, he did not forget to remind himself from time to time
that much better than desperate decisions calm and calmest
Consideration is. At such moments he straightened his eyes as much as possible
keen on the window, but unfortunately was out of sight of the
Morning mist that even obscured the other side of the narrow street,
to bring little confidence and cheerfulness. "Already seven o'clock," he said
when the alarm clock struck again, “already seven o'clock and another
always such a fog. ”And for a while he lay quietly with me
weak breath, as if he were expecting the complete silence
Return of the real and self-evident conditions.

But then he said to himself: “Before it hits a quarter past eight, I have to
be sure to get out of bed completely. Incidentally, is also up
Somebody come out of the shop to ask about me because that
Shop will open before seven o'clock. ”And now he set about
the entire length of the body out of bed completely evenly
to rock out. If he falls out of bed that way
the head remained, which he wanted to raise sharply when he fell,
probably unharmed. The back seemed hard; that would
probably nothing happened if it fell on the carpet. The biggest concern
made him consider the loud noise that should be and
the probably behind all doors if not horror, then at least
Would cause concern. But that had to be risked.

When Gregor was halfway out of bed - the new method was
more of a game than an effort, he always had to jerk
rocking - it occurred to him how easy everything would be if you were to him
Help would come. Two strong people - he thought of his father and that
Maids - would have sufficed completely; they only had their arms
push it under his arched back, peeling him out of bed like this,
to bend down with the burden and then just have to carefully tolerate,
that he performed the overflow on the floor, where the legs then
hopefully make sense of it. Well, not to mention that
the doors were locked, should he really have called for help?
Despite all adversity, he couldn't smile at the thought
suppress.

He was already so far that he could hardly do that when rocking harder
Balance was still preserved, and very soon he had to finally settle down
decide, because it was a quarter past five in five minutes - when it came on
the apartment door rang. "That's someone out of business," he said
himself and almost froze, while his little legs only hurriedly
danced. For a moment everything was still. "You don't open," said
Gregor, caught in some nonsensical hope. But then went
of course, as always, the maid stepped steadily to the door and
opened. Gregor only needed to hear the visitor's first greeting
and already knew who it was - the chief clerk himself. Why was only
Gregor was sentenced to serve at a company where you worked for the
the slightest omission caught the greatest suspicion? Because all of them
There weren't any employees among them
loyal devoted man whom if only a few hours in the morning
hadn't taken advantage of the business, foolish with remorse
and was downright unable to get out of bed? It was enough
really not to let an apprentice ask questions - if at all
this questioning was necessary - the chief clerk had to come himself, and
had to be shown to the whole innocent family that the
Investigation of this suspicious matter only to the mind of the
Could be entrusted to authorized signatories? And more as a result of the excitement, in
which Gregor was displaced by these considerations than as a result of one
With the right decision, he swung himself out of bed with all his might. It
gave a loud thump, but it wasn't a real crash. A
The carpet was not a little weakened, nor was the back
more elastic than Gregor had thought, so it didn't work out that way
striking muffled sound. Only he wasn't careful enough with his head
held and struck him; he turned it and rubbed it on the carpet
with anger and pain.

"Something fell in there," said the chief clerk in the next room on the left.
Gregor tried to introduce himself whether not also to the general manager
something similar could happen to him today; the possibility of that
one actually had to admit it. But how about the raw answer to this
The general manager in the next room made a few specific questions
Steps and let his patent leather boots creak. From the next room on the right
the nurse whispered to inform Gregor: "Gregor, he
Authorized officer is there. ”“ I know, ”said Gregor to himself; but so loud
he didn't dare say that his sister could have heard it
to raise.

“Gregor,” said the father from the next room on the left, “the gentleman
Authorized officer has come and asks why you are not with the
Went away early. We don't know what to tell him.
By the way, he also wants to speak to you personally. So please do that
Open the door. He will apologize for the mess in the room already the goodness
"Good morning, Mr. Samsa," called the chief clerk in a friendly manner
between. "He's not feeling well," said the mother to the chief clerk,
while the father was still talking at the door, “he is not well, believe
Me, authorized signatory. How else would Gregor get a train?
miss! The boy has nothing on his mind but business. I'm annoyed
almost to me that he never goes out in the evening; now he was eight
Days in town, but he was home every night. There he sits with us
at the table quietly reading the newspaper or studying timetables. It is
already a distraction for him when he is fretwork
employed. For example, he has two or three evenings there
carved a small frame; You will be amazed how handsome he is;
he hangs in the room; You will see him in a moment when Gregor
opens. Incidentally, I am happy that you are here, Mr. Prokurist;
we alone would not have got Gregor to open the door; he is
so persistent; and he is definitely not well, even though he is there in the morning
Denied it. ”“ I'll be right there, ”said Gregor slowly and deliberately
and did not move so as not to lose a word of conversation. "Different,
Madam, I can't explain it to myself either, "said the chief clerk,
“I hope it's not serious. If I also say the other hand
we must be business people - however you want, unfortunately or
fortunately - a slight malaise very often from business
Simply having to overcome considerations. "" So the manager can
asked the impatient father, knocking again
to the door. "No," said Gregor. One stepped in the next room on the left
embarrassing silence, in the next room on the right the nurse began to close
sob.

Why didn't the sister go to the others? She was probably only
now got out of bed and hadn't even started
to attract. And why was she crying? Because he didn't get up and that
Did not let the general manager in because he was in danger of leaving the post
and because then the boss will lose the parents with the old demands
would pursue again? Those were probably unnecessary worries for the time being.
Gregor was still here and didn't think in the least about his family
to leave. At the moment he was probably lying there on the carpet, and
no one who knew his condition would seriously have thought of him
demands that he let the chief clerk in. But because of this little one
Rudeness, for which a suitable excuse can easily be found later
would find, Gregor couldn’t have been sent away immediately.
And it seemed to Gregor that it would be much more sensible to leave him alone now
instead of disturbing him with crying and persuasion. But it was
the uncertainty that beset the others and their behavior
excused.

“Mr. Samsa,” the general manager called out in a raised voice, “what is it
Come on? You barricade yourself in your room, just answer yes
and no, give your parents serious, unnecessary worries and fail -
Just mentioning this as an aside - your business obligations rolled into one
actually unheard of ways. I speak on behalf of your parents and
Your boss and seriously ask for an immediate,
clear explanation. I am amazed, I am amazed. I believed you were one
to know calm, sane people, and now you suddenly seem
to want to start parading with strange whims. The chef
This morning indicated to me a possible explanation for your neglect
to - it concerned the debt collection that was recently entrusted to you - but me
Truly almost took my word of honor for making this declaration
could not apply. But now I see your incomprehensible here
Stubbornness and completely lose all pleasure, even in myself
to use the least for you. And your position is by no means that
firmest. I originally intended to give you all of this under four
Eyes to say, but since you are wasting my time here uselessly
I don't know why your parents don't find out too
should. So your recent accomplishments have been great
unsatisfactory; It's not the time of year to do special business
to do that, we acknowledge; but a season to no business
there is no such thing as doing, Mr. Samsa, there must be no. "

"But Herr Prokurist," cried Gregor, beside himself, and forgot in that
Excitement everything else, »I'll open immediately, instantly. A
A slight malaise, an attack of dizziness prevented me
to get up. I'm still in bed now. But now I am already
fresh again. I'm just getting out of bed. Just a little one
Wait a minute! It's not going as well as I thought. It is me
but already well. How that can only attack a person like that! Yet
I was fine last night, my parents know it, or better,
I already had a premonition last night. You would have me
have to look at. Why didn't I report it to the store! but
you just always think that you can get the disease without staying at home
will survive. Mr. Authorized Officer! Take care of my parents! For all, who
There is no reason to reproach me now; you have me
I didn't say a word about it either. You may have the last orders
that I have sent, have not read. By the way, still with the eight o'clock train
I go on the journey, the few hours of rest have strengthened me.
Just don't linger, Mr. Prokurist; I'm in the same moment myself
Business, and you have the goodness to say that and tell me the boss
to recommend!"

And while Gregor hastily expelled all of this and scarcely knew what he was
spoke, it was easy for him, probably as a result of what he had already achieved in bed
Exercise, approached the box and now tried to get up on it.
He actually wanted to open the door, actually to be seen
and speak to the general manager; he was eager to find out what the
to others who now longed for him, say at the sight of him
would. If they were frightened, Gregor had no responsibility
more and could be calm. But if they would accept everything calmly, then
he had no reason to be upset either, and could if he was
hurried to actually be at the train station at eight o'clock. At first it slid
now a few times from the smooth box, but at last he gave himself up
one last swing and stood upright; on the pain in the
He paid no attention to the abdomen, no matter how much they burned. Well let
he falls against the back of a nearby chair, on the edges of it
he held on with his little legs. But with that he also had them
Gained control over himself and fell silent, because now he could
Listen to authorized signatories.

"Did you understand a word?" Asked the chief clerk
Parents, "surely he's not making a fool of us?"
sake, "cried the mother, already crying," it may be heavy
ill and we torment him. Grete! She then shouted. "Mother?"
called the nurse from the other side. They communicated through
Gregor's room. “You must see a doctor immediately. Gregor is sick.
See the doctor quickly. Have you heard Gregor talk now? "" That was one
Animal voice, ”said the chief clerk, noticeably quietly opposite him
Screaming mother. “Anna! Anna! ”Called the father through the anteroom
the kitchen and clapped her hands, "Get a locksmith right away!"
And then the two girls were running through it with rustling skirts
Anteroom - how did the nurse get dressed so quickly? -
and tore open the apartment door. You couldn't hear the door at all
strike; they had probably left it open, as it is in apartments
in which a great misfortune has occurred.

But Gregor had become much calmer. So one understood his own
Words no longer, although they are clear enough to him, clearer than before,
had occurred, perhaps as a result of the ear's getting used to it. but
after all, people now believed that it was not quite in with him
Was okay, and was ready to help him. The confidence and
Security, with which the first orders had been made, did
him well. He felt included in the human circle and again
hoped for both, the doctor and the locksmith, without her actually
exactly to divorce, great and surprising achievements. To for the
the clearest possible voice as critical meetings approach
he coughed a little, but tried hard to do it all
to do muffled, since this noise may already be different than
human cough sounded what he himself no longer had to choose
trusted. It had become very quiet in the next room.
Perhaps the parents were sitting at the table with the general manager and
whispered, maybe everyone was leaning against the door and listening.

Gregor slowly pushed his armchair towards the door, let go of it there,
threw himself against the door, held on to it - the balls of his
Legs had a little glue - and rested there one
For a moment from the exertion. But then he set about
turning the key in the lock with your mouth. Unfortunately it seemed that
he had no real teeth - what should he do with that?
Take the key? - but the jaws were of course very strong,
with her help he really set the key in motion and
did not pay attention to the fact that he undoubtedly did some harm
added, because a brown liquid came out of his mouth and overflowed
the key and dripped onto the floor. "Just listen," said he
Authorized officer in the next room, "he turns the key." That was for
Gregor a great encouragement; but everyone should have called out to him
father and mother too: "Fresh, Gregor," they would have called
should, "just get close to the lock!"
Notion that all his endeavors were eagerly followed
he fell senseless with all he could muster
the key. Depending on the progress of the rotation of the key
if he danced around the castle, now he only held his mouth
upright, and depending on the need he hung on the key or pressed
then put him down again with all the weight of his body. The lighter one
The sound of the lock finally snapping back literally woke Gregor.
With a sigh of relief he said to himself: "So I didn't need the locksmith,"
and put his head on the handle to open the door completely.

Since he had to open the door in this way, it was actually already
quite wide open, and he cannot yet be seen. He had to
first turn slowly around one door leaf, very much
careful if he doesn't plump up before entering the room
wanted to fall his back. He was still with that difficult move
busy and didn't have time to pay attention to anything else, so he listened
utter a loud "Oh!" to the general manager - it sounded as if
the wind rushes - and now he looked at him, too, like him, the one next
the door was, pressed the hand to the open mouth and slowly
backed away as if an invisible, evenly continuing effect were driving him away
Force. The mother - she stood here despite the presence of the
Authorized officers with those who were still dissolved from the night, high up
bristling hair - first looked at father with folded hands,
then took two steps to Gregor and fell over in the midst of them
they down around spreading skirts, the face completely undetectable
lowered to her chest. The father clenched them with a hostile expression
Faust, as if he wanted to push Gregor back into his room, then saw himself
unsure of the living room, then shaded his eyes and with his hands
wept so that his mighty chest shook.

Gregor didn't even step into the room, but leaned inside
to the bolted door wing, so that his body is only half and
above it was the head tilted sideways, with which he was directed to the
peered over. It had gotten a lot lighter now; was clear
on the other side of the street a section of the opposite,
endless gray-black house - it was a hospital - with his
regular windows piercing hard through the front; the rain fell
still down, but only with large, individually visible and formal ones too
drops thrown down one by one on the earth. That
There were plenty of breakfast dishes on the table, because for him
Father's breakfast was the most important meal of the day that he was at
reading various newspapers dragged on for hours. Especially at the
A photograph of Gregory hung from his opposite wall
Military service, which portrayed him as a lieutenant, like him, with his hand on his sword,
smiling carefree, demanding respect for his demeanor and uniform. the
The door to the anteroom was open and you could see the door to the apartment
was open to the forecourt of the apartment and to the beginning of the
stairs leading downwards.

"Well," said Gregor, and was well aware that he was the only one
who had remained calm, “I'll get dressed in a minute, that
Pack up the collection and drive away. Do you want, do you want me
let go? Well, Mr. Prokurist, you see I am not
stubborn and I like to work; traveling is arduous, but me
couldn't live without traveling. Where are you going, sir
Authorized signatory? Into business? Yes? Will you report everything truthfully?
One may be unable to work at the moment, but then it is
the right time to remember previous achievements and
to remember that later, after removing the obstacle, one will certainly
the harder and more collected you will work. I'm the boss
so indebted, you know that very well. On the other hand have
i care about my parents and sister. I'm in a bind
but I will also work my way out again. But do it to me
no more difficult than it already is. Keep mine in business
Political party! You don't love the traveler, I know. You think he deserves it
a lot of money and leads a beautiful life. You don't have any
special occasion to think through this prejudice better. she
but, Mr. Prokurist, you have a better overview of them
Conditions than the rest of the staff, yes even, completely in confidence
said, a better overview than the boss himself, who in
his capacity as an entrepreneur is easy to judge
to the disadvantage of an employee. You also know very well
that the traveler who is out of business most of the year,
so easily a victim of gossip, coincidence and baseless
Complaints against which to defend himself can become quite impossible
is because he usually doesn't find out anything from them and only if he does
exhausted a trip has ended, at home the bad, on theirs
Causes no longer to be seen through consequences in one's own body
gets to feel. Authorized officer, don't go away without a word
to have said that shows me that at least you are giving me a little
Agree! "

But the chief clerk had already heard from Gregor's first words
turned away, and only watched over his shrugging shoulder
raised lips back to Gregor. And while Gregor's speech was standing
he did not remain silent for a moment, but withdrew from the without Gregor
To keep your eyes on the door, but very gradually, as if one existed
secret forbidden to leave the room. He was already in the anteroom, and
after the sudden movement with which he took his foot out of the for the last time
Living room moved, you would have believed that he had just broken his feet
burned. In the anteroom, however, he stretched his right hand far away
towards the stairs, as if an almost unearthly one was waiting for him there
Salvation.

Gregor saw that in this mood he would not refer to the general manager
The case may be allowed to go away if that would result in his position in the business
should not be endangered to the utmost. The parents understood that
all not so good; they had been convinced in the long years
educated that Gregor was provided for his life in this business, and
also had so much to do with the current worries
that they had lost all foresight. But Gregor had
this foresight. The general manager had to be held, reassured, convinced and
finally to be won; the future of Gregor and his family depended on
but from it! If only the sister had been here! She was clever; she
had already cried while Gregor was still lying quietly on his back. And sure
had the general manager, this lady friend, let her guide him;
she would have closed the apartment door and the horror in the anteroom
talked out of it. But the sister wasn't there, Gregor himself had to
Act. And without thinking that he is his present
Abilities to move, did not even know without it too
think that his speech might - yes, probably not
had been understood, he left the door; pushed through the
Opening; wanted to go to the authorized signatory, who was already at the railing of the
Ridiculously held onto the square with both hands; but fell
immediately, looking for something to hold on to, with a little scream at his
many legs down. No sooner had it happened than he felt for the first time
physical comfort this morning; who had legs
solid ground under itself; they obeyed perfectly as he obeyed his
Noticed joy; even strove to carry him wherever he went
wanted to; and already he believed, the final improvement of all suffering
am imminent. But at the same moment as he was there
swaying with restrained movement, not far from his mother
away, she was lying on the floor across from her, she jumped
so completely absorbed in yourself, suddenly your arms up high
Outstretched, fingers splayed, called: "Help, for God's sake
Help! ”, Head bowed as if she wanted to see Gregor better, ran
but, contrary to this, pointlessly going back; had forgotten that behind
the set table stood for her; sat down when she got to him
was in a hurry to see him, as if absent-minded, and did not seem to be at all
notice that next to her the coffee is pouring out of the overturned large pot
full stream poured onto the carpet.

"Mother, mother," said Gregor softly, and looked up at her. Of the
For a moment he had completely lost his mind;
on the other hand, he couldn't fail to see the flowing coffee
snapping the jaws into space several times. She screamed about it
Mother up recently, fled from the table and fell to her
hurrying towards father in the arms. But Gregor didn't have time now
for his parents; the chief clerk was already on the stairs; chin up
the railing, he looked back for the last time. Gregor took one
Running to catch up with him as safely as possible; the general manager had to do something
suspect, because he made a jump over several steps and disappeared;
"Huh!" But he still shouted, it sounded through the whole stairwell. Unfortunately
now also this flight of the authorized representative seemed to the father who had hitherto
had been relatively prepared to be completely confused, for instead of
to run after the chief clerk himself or at least Gregor in the
Not to hinder the persecution, he grabbed the stick of the with his right hand
Authorized officer, the one with hat and overcoat on an armchair
left behind, took a large newspaper from the table with his left hand
and set off, stamping his feet, to Gregor by waving the
To drive Stockes and the newspaper back to his room. No asking
Gregors helped, no request was understood, he still liked the head
Turning so humbly, the father just stamped his feet harder. Over there
the mother had opened a window in spite of the cool weather, and
Leaning out, she pressed her face in well outside the window
Your hands. There was a strong draft between the alley and the stairwell,
the window curtains flew open, the newspapers rustled on the table,
individual leaves wafted across the ground. Inexorably he urged
Father, making hissing noises like a savage. But now Gregor had
No exercise at all in walking backwards, it was really very slow.
If Gregor had only been allowed to turn around, he would be right in his
Been in the room, but he was afraid the father by the time-consuming
To make turn impatient, and every moment threatened him nevertheless of
the fatal blow on the back or on the stick in the father's hand
the head. At last, however, Gregor had no other choice than him
realized with horror that he was not even walking backwards in the direction
knew how to comply; and so he began, under ceaseless fearful
Sidelong glances at the father, as quickly as possible, in
Turning reality around very slowly. Maybe noticed
the father his goodwill, because he did not disturb him here, but rather
even conducted the turning movement from a distance with the here and there
Tip of his stick. If only not that unbearable hiss of the
Father would have been! Gregor completely lost his head over this. He already was
almost completely turned around when he, always listening to this hissing,
even made a mistake and turned back a little. But when he finally did
was happy with his head in front of the doorway, it turned out to be
Body was too wide to get through easily. It fell to the father
of course in its current condition not even remotely
open the other door, for example, to give Gregor a sufficient one
To create passage. His obsession was just that Gregor as quickly as
possible in his room. He would never have the awkward ones either
Preparations are permitted that Gregor needed to get up and
maybe this way to get through the door. Maybe he was drifting
as if there were no obstacles, Gregor now with a particular noise
forward; behind Gregor it no longer sounded like the voice
just a single father; now there was really no more fun, and
Gregor pushed himself - no matter what - into the door. One side
of his body rose, he lay crooked in the doorway, his one
Flank was completely sore, ugly stains remained on the white door,
soon he got stuck and couldn't have moved on his own
Small legs on one side hung trembling in the air
the others were painfully pressed to the ground - so the father gave him
from behind a now truly relieving thrust, and it flew,
bleeding profusely, far into his room. The door was still with the
The stick slammed, then it was finally quiet.




II.


Only at dusk did Gregor wake up from his heavy
faint-like sleep. It would certainly not be much later without it
Disturbance awakens because he felt sufficiently rested and
slept well, but it seemed to him as if a fleeting step had him
and a careful closing of the door leading to the anteroom awakened.
The glow of the electric tram lay pale here and there on it
Ceiling and on the higher parts of the furniture, but below with Gregor
it was dark. He pushed slowly, still clumsy with his
Feeling for feelers, which he was only now learning to appreciate, towards the door
to see what had happened there. His left side seemed one
only long, uncomfortably tense scar, and it had to be on his two
Rows of legs literally limp. Incidentally, one leg was in the course of the
morning incidents seriously injured - it was almost a
Wonder that only one thing had been injured - and dragged lifelessly behind.

Only at the door did he notice what had actually drawn him there; it
had been the smell of something edible. Because there was a bowl with it
filled with sweet milk in which small slices of white bread floated. Nearly
he would have laughed with joy because he was even more hungry than on
Tomorrow, and immediately he dipped his head almost over his eyes in her
Milk in. But soon, disappointed, he withdrew it again; not only,
that he had trouble eating because of his delicate left side
made - and he could only eat when the whole body was puffing
cooperated - so he also liked the milk that is usually his
Favorite drink was and it was certainly his sister for that reason
had put in, not at all, yes, he turned almost reluctantly
from the bowl and crawled back to the center of the room.

As Gregor saw through the crack in the door, there was gas in the living room
lit, but while otherwise at this time of day the father was his
Mother's newspaper that appears in the afternoon, and sometimes that too
Sister used to read aloud in a raised voice, one could now hear
no sound. Well maybe this reading was what the
Sister always told and wrote, lately at all
come to exercise. But it was also so quiet all around, but still
certainly the apartment was not empty. “What a quiet life the family
but led, ”said Gregor to himself, feeling that he was rigid in front of him
saw in the dark, a great pride that he was his parents and
his sister had such a life in such a beautiful apartment
can provide. But how if now all calm, all prosperity,
all satisfaction should end with horror? Not to yourself
To lose himself in such thoughts, Gregor preferred to move
and crawled up and down the room.

Once during the long evening there was one side door and once
the other opened up to a small crack and quickly again
closed; someone felt the need to come in, but also
again too many concerns. Gregor went straight to the
Living room door Stop, determined, somehow the hesitant visitor
bring in or at least find out who it is; but now
the door was no longer opened and Gregor waited in vain. Early,
when the doors were locked everyone had wanted to come in
now that he had opened one door and revealed the other
had been opened during the day, no more came, and the
Keys were now also in the outside.

The light in the living room was not extinguished until late at night, and
now it was easy to see that the parents and the sister had been so long
had stayed awake, for as one could clearly hear, they were leaving
now all three on tiptoe. Certainly no one came until morning
more to Gregor; So he had a long time to be undisturbed
think about how he should rearrange his life now. But the high one
vacant rooms where he was forced to lie flat on the floor,
frightened him without being able to find out the cause, because it was
yes, his room he has lived in for five years - and half with one
unconsciously and not without a slight shame he hurried under it
Sofa, where he was, despite the fact that his back was pressed a little and
despite the fact that he could no longer raise his head, immediately very comfortable
felt and only regretted that his body was too wide to be complete
to be accommodated under the sofa.

There he stayed the whole night, from which he was partly half asleep
hunger repeatedly startled him, spent, but partly in
Worries and vague hopes, but all of them lead to the same conclusion
led him to keep calm for the time being and be patient and
greatest consideration of the family the inconvenience bearable
which he had to do to her in his present condition
cause was forced.

Even early in the morning, it was almost night, Gregor had
Opportunity to test the strength of the decisions he has just made, because
from the anteroom the nurse, almost completely dressed, opened the door
and looked in with tension. She didn't find him right away, but when she found him
under the couch remarked - God, he had to be somewhere, he
hadn't been able to fly away - she was so frightened that she,
without being able to control himself, the door slammed again from the outside. but
as if she regretted her behavior, she opened the door again immediately and stepped,
as if it were with a seriously ill person or even with a stranger
Toe in. Gregor had his head up just to the edge of the
Canapes pushed forward and watched her. I wonder if she would notice
that he had left the milk standing, and by no means for lack
of hunger, and whether she would bring in any other food than his
better matched? If she didn't do it by herself, he would rather
starve when they point it out, despite it actually being him
there was a tremendous urge to advance under the sofa towards the sister
Throwing feet and asking them for something nice to eat. but
the nurse immediately noticed with astonishment that the bowl was still full
who had only a little milk spilled all around, she lifted him up at once
on, not with your bare hands, but with a rag, and
carried him out. Gregor was extremely curious about what to replace
would bring, and he thought about it in various ways.
But he could never have guessed what the sister was in her goodness
really did. She brought him a whole to test his taste
Selection, all spread out on an old newspaper. There was old
half-rotten vegetables; Bones from supper, those from solidified
white sauce were surrounded; a couple of raisins and almonds; a cheese den
Gregor had declared inedible two days ago; a dry bread,
one bread smeared with butter and one smeared with butter and
salted bread. In addition, she added that to all of them
probably once and for all a bowl intended for Gregor, in which she
Had poured water. And out of delicacy, knowing that Gregor was ahead of her
would not eat her, she hurried away and even turned the
Key around so that only Gregor could notice that he was so comfortable
may do as he wants. Gregor's legs were buzzing than they were now
went to dinner. Incidentally, his wounds must have been complete
to be healed, he no longer felt any hindrance, he was astonished about it and
thought of how he got himself with the knife more than a month ago
little cut in his finger, and how that wound he had the day before yesterday
had hurt enough. "Should I have less sensitivity now?"
he thought, and was already sucking greedily on the cheese he was eating in front of everyone
other dishes immediately and emphatically. Quickly
one after the other and with eyes watering with satisfaction, he consumed it
Cheese, vegetables and sauce; the fresh food, on the other hand, was tasty
not him, he couldn't even stand her smell and dragged
even the things he wanted to eat a little further away. He was
Already finished with everything and was just lazy on the same
Place when the sister as a sign that he should withdraw,
slowly turned the key. That startled him immediately, anyway
he was almost asleep and he hurried back under the sofa. but
it cost him a great deal of self-conquest, even for a short while
who was the sister in the room to stay under the sofa, for
from the plentiful food his body had rounded a little, and
he could hardly breathe there in the confines. Having small attacks of suffocation
he watched with bulging eyes, like the unsuspecting one
Sister didn't just sweep up the leftovers with a broom,
but even the food that Gregor didn't touch at all, as if it were
So even these no longer to be used, and how they hastily put everything in
poured a bucket, which she closed with a wooden lid, whereupon she
carried everything out. No sooner had she turned around than Gregor was already pulling himself
from under the sofa and stretched and puffed up.

In this way Gregor got his food every day, once in the morning,
if the parents and the maid were still sleeping, go back the second time
the general lunch, because then the parents slept too
a little longer, and the maid was with the nurse
sent away for some errand. Certainly they did not want that either
Gregor was starving, but maybe they couldn't have endured
to find out more about his food than hearsay, maybe
the sister wanted them a possibly only minor grief
save, because they actually suffered just enough.

What excuses did you use to see the doctor and the doctor that first morning
Gregor was able to get the Schlosser out of the apartment again
not experienced, because since it was not understood, no one thought of it,
not even the sister, that he could understand the others, and so on
if his sister was in his room he had to be content with
only here and there to hear their sighs and calls from the saints. First
later, when she got used to everything a little - from
of course there was never any question of getting used to it -,
Gregor sometimes caught a remark that was meant to be friendly
or so could be interpreted. "But today he liked it,"
she said when Gregor had cleaned up the meal while eating
they in the opposite case, which gradually become more common
repeated, almost sadly, used to say: 'Now everything is back
stopped. "

But while Gregor could get no news immediately,
he listened to some things from the next room, and where he was speaking
heard, he ran straight to the relevant door and pushed himself with it
whole body to her. Especially in the first time there was no conversation
that wasn't about him somehow, if only in secret. Two
For days, deliberations on how could be heard at all meals
one should behave now; but also spoke between meals
one on the same topic, because there were always at least two
Family members at home, as nobody is likely to stay home alone
wanted and you definitely didn't want to leave the apartment completely
could. Also, the maid had on the first day - it was
not quite clear what and how much she knew about what had happened -
On her knees the mother asked to dismiss her immediately, and when she was up
said goodbye a quarter of an hour later, she thanked her for the dismissal
with tears, as for the greatest benefit that has been shown to her here
and gave, without being asked, a terrible one
Vowed not to tell anyone a thing.

Now the sister had to cook with the mother too; Indeed
didn’t bother too much, because you hardly ate anything. Heard again and again
Gregor, how one in vain asked the other to eat and
got no answer other than, "Thanks, I've had enough" or something
Something like that. Perhaps nothing was drunk either. She often asked
Sister asked the father if he would like a beer, and she offered a hearty offer
herself to fetch it herself, and when the father was silent she said to him
to take away any concerns that they could also ask the caretaker about it
send, but then the father finally said a big "no", and
it was no longer spoken of.

In the course of the first day the father put all of them down
Financial circumstances and prospects of both the mother and the
Sister. Every now and then he would get up from the table and take it out of his
small Wertheimkassa that he made five years ago
Had saved collapse of his business, some receipt or
any reservation book. You could hear him opening the complicated lock
unlocked and locked again after removing what was wanted. These
Some of the statements made by the father were the first pleasant things Gregor said
heard since his imprisonment. He thought
that the father had nothing left of that business
was, at least his father hadn't told him otherwise, and
Gregor hadn't asked him about it either. Gregor's concern was
Back then I just had to do everything possible to help the family
business misfortune all turned into a complete hopelessness
had brought to be forgotten as quickly as possible. And so he had
At that time I started working with a very special fire and was almost
A little clerk turned into a traveler overnight
of course had completely different ways of making money, and that
Work successes are immediately reflected in the cash commission
transformed that of the astonished and happy family back home to the
Table could be laid. There had been good times and never
afterwards they had repeated themselves, at least in this splendor,
in spite of the fact that Gregor later earned so much money that he took the trouble of
whole family was able to and also carried. You just had
accustomed to it, both the family and Gregor, you took the money
grateful, he was happy to deliver it, but wanted a special warmth
no longer surrender. Only the sister was still close to Gregor after all
stayed, and it was his secret plan to distinguish them from
Gregor loved music very much and knew how to play the violin in a touching way,
next year, regardless of the huge cost of doing that
had to, and which one would bring in in another way, on that
To send to the Conservatory. Often during the short stays
Gregor's in town became that in conversations with his sister
Mentioned the Conservatory, but always only as a beautiful dream of its
Realization was out of the question, and the parents didn't even listen
like these innocent mentions; but Gregor thought very firmly
and intended to solemnly declare it on Christmas Eve.

Such thoughts, quite useless in his present condition, passed through him
through his head while he was glued to the door there and listened.
Sometimes he couldn't listen anymore because of the general tiredness and
slapped his head carelessly on the door, but stopped at once
tight again, because even the little noise he makes with it
had been heard next door and had silenced everyone. "What
he's just drifting again, "said the father after a while, apparently at the
The door was turned, and only then did the interrupted conversation begin
gradually resumed.

Gregor now found out enough - because his father took care of his
Repeating explanations often, partly because he himself familiarized with these
Hadn't been occupied with things in a long time, partly because my mother
did not understand everything the first time - that in spite of all the misfortunes
a very small fortune from the old days still exists
was that the unaffected interest in the meantime a little
had grown. But besides that, the money was Gregor's
brought home every month - he only had a few himself
Keep guilders for yourself -, not fully used up and
had accumulated to a small capital. Gregor, behind his
Door, nodded eagerly, pleased with this unexpected caution and
Thrift. Actually, he would have had with this excess money
may have passed on the father's debt to the boss,
and the day on which he could have got rid of this post would be long
closer, but now it was undoubtedly better the way Father was
had set up.

Now this money was by no means enough to support the family from
to let the interest live; perhaps it was enough to bring the family
To get a maximum of two years, it was no more. So it was just
a sum that one shouldn't actually attack, and that for him
Emergency had to be covered; But you had to have the money to live
to earn. But now the father was a healthy, but old man,
who hadn't worked for five years and at least not himself
was able to trust a lot; in those five years he had what the first
The holidays of his troubled and yet unsuccessful life were a lot of fat
and had become quite cumbersome as a result. And the old one
Maybe mother should earn money now who suffered from asthma who
a hike through the apartment already caused effort, and that
every other day with difficulty breathing on the sofa by the open window
spent? And the sister should earn money who is still a child
was seventeen, and so was her previous way of life
was very indulgent, which had consisted of dressing nicely,
to sleep late, to help out with a few
humble pleasures to participate and especially violin too
to play? When it came to the need to make money,
First Gregor always let go of the door and threw himself on the one next to the one
There was a cool leather sofa in the door, because he was very hot with shame
and grief.

Often he lay there all long nights, never slept for a moment
and just pawed at the leather for hours. Or he didn't shy away from them
great effort to push an armchair to the window, then that
To crawl up the window sill and, propped up in the armchair, to sit down
Leaning windows, apparently just in some memory of that
The liberating thing that used to be there for him out of the window
look. Because in fact he saw them just a little from day to day
distant things more and more indistinctly; the hospital opposite,
the all-too-frequent sight of which he had cursed earlier, he got
no longer to face at all, and if he hadn't known exactly
that he lived in the quiet but completely urban Charlottenstrasse,
he could have believed that from his window he was looking into a wasteland
look in which the gray sky and the gray earth indistinguishable
united. The attentive sister had only seen twice
that the armchair was by the window when she
after she had tidied up the room, put the chair back to the
Slid the window over, yes even from now on the inner casement open
let.

If only Gregor had talked to his sister and thanked her for everything
what she had to do for him, he would have her service easier
endure; but as it was, he suffered from it. The sister was looking for them, of course
To blur the embarrassment of the whole thing as much as possible, and the longer time
passed, the better she succeeded, of course, but so did Gregor
saw through everything much more precisely over time. Even their entry was for
him terrible. No sooner had she entered than she ran without taking any time
take to close the door, as much as she otherwise paid attention to it, to everyone
To spare the sight of Gregor's room, straight to the window and
tore it open as if it were almost suffocating, with hasty hands, stayed too,
even if it was so cold, stand by the window for a while and breathe
deep. She frightened Gregor every day with this running and noise
twice; the whole time he was trembling under the sofa and knew
but very good that she would certainly have gladly spared him if it had
she would only have been able to find herself in a room in which Gregor
found to stop with the window closed.

Once, it must have been a month since Gregor's metamorphosis
and it was no longer a special reason for the sister to go over
Amazed Gregor's appearance came a little earlier than
otherwise and still found Gregor, like him, immobile and so right to the
Terrified, looked out the window. It would be for Gregor
it would not have been unexpected if it had not occurred since he did it
by his position prevented the window from opening immediately, but she
not only did she not go in, she even drew back and closed the door; a
Stranger could almost have thought that Gregor had been waiting for her and
wanted to bite her. Of course, Gregor immediately went into hiding
the sofa, but he had to wait until noon before the nurse
came back and she seemed much more restless than usual.
that the sight of him was still unbearable for her, and still so for her
must remain unbearable, and that she must have had to overcome herself
Not at the sight of even the small part of his body
to run away with which he protruded from under the sofa. About her too
To spare this sight he carried on his back one day - he
It took four hours to do this - the sheet on the sofa
and arranged it in such a way that it now completely obscures
and that the nurse, even if she bent down, did not see him
could. If, in their opinion, this sheet had not been necessary,
then she could have removed it because it wasn't for fun
Gregors could belong to, to shut himself off completely, it was clear
enough, but she left the sheet as it was, and Gregor believed
even catching a grateful look when he was with the
Head carefully lifted the sheet a little to see how that
Sister took up the new facility.

For the first fourteen days, the parents couldn't hold it back
bring to come in to him and he often heard her the present one
The sister's work was fully recognized, while she has hitherto been frequent
had annoyed the sister for seeing them as a something
useless girl had appeared. But now both of them often waited, the father
and the mother, in front of Gregor's room, while the sister is there
cleaned up, and no sooner had she come out than she had to be very careful
tell what it looked like in the room, what Gregor had eaten, what he had done
had behaved this time, and whether maybe a little improvement too
notice was. Incidentally, the mother wanted Gregor relatively soon
visit, but the father and sister kept up with them first
Reasons to which Gregor listened very carefully and which he did
fully approved. But later they had to be held back by force
and when she called out: “Let me see Gregor, he's mine
unhappy son! Don't you understand that I have to see him? "
then Gregor thought that maybe it would be good after all if the mother
would come in, not every day of course, but maybe once a day
Week; she understood everything much better than her sister, in spite of her
in all her courage was just a child and in the end maybe
had only taken on such a difficult task out of childish recklessness.

Gregor's wish to see his mother soon came true. While
Out of consideration for his parents, Gregor didn't want to leave that day
pointing at the window, but he could crawl on the few square meters
Not much of the floor either, he endured the quiet lying down even while
heavy at night, the food soon no longer bothered him in the least
Pleasure, and so he got into the habit of criss-crossing and for diversion
To crawl across walls and ceiling. Especially up on the ceiling
he liked to hang out; it was very different from lying on the floor; man
breathed more freely; a slight swing went through the body, and in the
almost happy absent-mindedness in which Gregor was up there,
it could happen that, to his own surprise, he let himself go
and clapped the floor. But now, of course, he had his body
completely different in violence than before and damaged himself
not in such a big trap. The sister immediately noticed the new one
Entertainment that Gregor had found for himself - he left behind
even while crawling here and there traces of its glue - and there
she put it in her head, Gregor crawling to the greatest extent
and the furniture that prevented it, especially the
Box and desk to move away. But now she wasn't
able to do this alone; she dared not ask her father for help
ask; the maid would certainly not have helped her, because
this about sixteen-year-old girl waited bravely since her release
the previous cook, but had asked for the perk that
To be allowed to keep the kitchen permanently locked and only on special
Having to open call; so there was nothing left for the sister to do but
to fetch the mother once in the absence of the father. With exclamations
The mother came up excitedly, but fell silent at the door
in front of Gregor's room. First of all, of course, the nurse checked whether everything was in the
Room was fine; only then did she let her mother in. Gregor
in a great hurry had the sheet deeper and more wrinkled
pulled, the whole thing really just looked like a random over the sofa
thrown sheet off. This time too, Gregor refrained from under the
To spy on sheet; he renounced it, this time the mother
to see, and was just glad that she had come after all. "Come on,
you don't see him, "said the sister, and evidently she was leading them
Mother by the hand. Gregor now heard the two weak women
at least heavy old boxes moved from their place, and like them
Sister kept doing most of the work for herself,
without listening to the warnings of the mother, who feared that she would
will overexert yourself. It took a long time. Probably after
After a quarter of an hour's work, my mother said you should get the box
Better to leave it here, because firstly it is too heavy, they would go ahead
Arrival of the father not finished and with the box in the middle
Barring every way in Gregor's room, but secondly it was all
not sure that removing the furniture would be a favor for Gregor
happen. You seem to be doing the opposite; you oppress the
Sight of the empty wall downright the heart; and why shouldn't
Gregor have this sensation, since he has long since touched the room furniture
I am used to it and will therefore feel abandoned in the empty room.
"And then it is not so," concluded the mother, very softly, like her
almost whispered as if she wanted to avoid Gregor's
exact location she did not know, even the sound of the voice
hear, because she was convinced that he did not understand the words
»And is it not as if by removing the furniture we showed
that we give up all hope of recovery and let him be inconsiderate
left to yourself? I think it would be best for us to find the room
in exactly the same condition as it used to be, so that Gregor,
when he comes back to us, finds everything unchanged and so on
easier to forget the interim time. "

On hearing these words from his mother, Gregor realized that there was a lack
every direct human address associated with the
monotonous life in the midst of the family over the course of these two months
his mind had to be confused, for otherwise he could do it
not explain that he could seriously have asked for that
his room would be emptied. Did he really feel like having the warm one
Conveniently furnished rooms transforming inherited furniture into a cave
in which he would of course be undisturbed in all directions
can crawl, but also under simultaneous, rapid, complete
Forgot his human past? He was already now
close to forgetting, and only the voice that has not been heard for a long time
the mother had roused him. Nothing should be removed, everything
had to remain, the good effects of the furniture on its condition
he could not do without; and if the furniture prevented him, that
crawling around senselessly, it wasn't harm, it was
major advantage.

But unfortunately the sister disagreed; she had
but not entirely unjustified, accustomed to discussing the
Affairs of Gregory as a special expert on the
Parents to perform, and so was the mother's advice for them now
Sister reason enough not only to remove the box and the
Desk that she had thought of alone at first, but on the
Removal of all furniture, with the exception of the indispensable sofa,
to pass. It wasn't just childlike defiance, of course, and that in the
recently so unexpected and hard-earned self-confidence that she
certain to this requirement; she actually had
observes that Gregor needed a lot of space to crawl, on the other hand she
Furniture, as far as one could see, not used in the slightest. Maybe
but also the enthusiastic mind of the girls of her age played along,
who seeks satisfaction at every opportunity, and through the Grete
now let himself be tempted to do so, as did Gregor’s situation
To want to make it more terrifying, to then even more than until now
to be able to do for him. Because in a room where Gregor was all alone
dominated the empty walls, no one except Grete would ever
dare to enter.

And so she did not give up her mother's decision
who seemed unsure of the restlessness in this room too,
soon fell silent and the sister did her best to remove the
Box helped. Well, Gregor could still do without the box in an emergency,
but the desk had to stay. And hardly had the women
leave the room with the box they groaned against,
when Gregor poked his head out from under the sofa to see him
could intervene carefully and as considerately as possible. But for
Unfortunately it was the mother who came back first while
Grete held the box in the next room and held it back and forth alone
swung forward without, of course, moving him. The mother
but if Gregor was not used to the sight it would have made her sick
and so Gregor, terrified, hurried backwards to the
other end of the sofa, but could no longer prevent that
Sheet moved a little in front. That was enough for the mother
to draw attention. She paused, stood still for a moment, and left
then back to Grete.

Even so, Gregor kept saying to himself that nothing out of the ordinary
happening, just moving a few pieces of furniture, it seemed like
he soon had to admit that the women went back and forth,
her little shouts, the scratching of the furniture on the floor, like a
great excitement, nourished on all sides, and he had to, like that
firmly he pulled his head and legs to himself and his body down to the floor
pressed, inevitably saying that he could not stand the whole thing long
will. They cleared his room for him; took away everything that was dear to him
was; had the box that held the fretsaw and other tools
she already carried out; loosened it already in the ground
buried desk at which he as a business graduate when
Citizen pupil, even as a primary school pupil, his duties
had written - he really had no more time, the good ones
Intentions to examine what the two women whose existence he had
By the way, had almost forgotten, because they were already working from exhaustion
mute, and all you could hear was the heavy tapping of her feet.

And so it broke out - the women were just leaning on the
Next room to the desk to take a breather -,
changed the direction of the run four times, he really didn't know what
he was supposed to save first, then he looked at the otherwise empty wall
the picture of the lady clad in fur is striking,
hurriedly crawled up and pressed himself to the glass that held him
good for his hot belly. At least this picture, Gregor's now
completely covered, no one would certainly take away now. He rolled his head
after the door of the living room to meet the women on their return
watch.

They hadn't allowed themselves much rest and were already coming back; Grete
had put his arm around his mother and was almost carrying her. “So take something
we now? ”said Grete and looked around. Their eyes met
with Gregor's on the wall. Probably only because of the mother's presence
if she kept her composure, she bent her face to her mother to keep her away from her
To keep them from looking around, and said, though shakily and thoughtlessly:
“Come on, let's not go into the living room for a moment
Go back? ”Grete's intention was clear to Gregor, she wanted them
Get mother to safety and then chase him off the wall.
Well, at least she could try! He sat on his picture and
did not exist. He would rather jump in Grete's face.

But Grete's words had made the mother even more uneasy, and she stepped forward
Side, saw the huge brown spot on the floral wallpaper,
shouted before she actually realized that Gregor was what she was
saw in a screaming, hoarse voice: "Oh God, oh God!" and fell along
arms outstretched, as if giving up everything, over the sofa and
did not move. "You, Gregor!" Called the sister with a raised fist
and haunting looks. They were the first since the metamorphosis
Words that she had addressed directly to him. She ran into
Adjoining room to get some essence that she used to get the mother out of it
might wake her impotence; Gregor wanted to help too - to the rescue
there was still time for the picture; but it stuck firmly to the glass and had to
to tear yourself away by force; he then ran into the next room as if he could
he give the sister some advice, as in earlier times; but had to
then stand idly behind her; while they are in different vials
rummaged around, shocked her when she turned around; a bottle fell
hit the ground and broke; a splinter wounded Gregor in the face,
some caustic medicine flowed around him; Grete now took longer without herself
stopping as many vials as she could hold and ran
with them to the mother; she slammed the door with her foot. Gregor
was now locked by his mother, perhaps through his fault
was near death; he couldn't open the door if he wanted it
Don't chase away the sister who had to stay with her mother; he had
now nothing to do but wait; and from self-reproach and
Worried, he began to crawl, crawled over everything, walls,
Furniture and ceiling and finally fell in desperation as himself
the whole room was already starting to turn around it, in the middle of the big one
Table.

A little while passed, Gregor lay there weak, it was all around
quiet, maybe that was a good sign. Then it rang. The girl
was of course locked in her kitchen and Grete had to open it
walk. The father had come. "What happened?" Were his first
Words; Grete's appearance must have told him everything. Grete answered
in a dull voice, evidently she pressed her face to the father's
Breast: “The mother passed out, but she is feeling better. Gregor
has broken out. "" I expected it, "said my father," I did
Always said it to you, but you women don't want to hear. 'Gregor was
it is clear that his father misinterpreted Grete's overly short communication
and assumed that Gregor was guilty of some act of violence
let him come. So now Gregor had to appease his father
because he had neither the time nor the opportunity to enlighten him. and
so he fled to the door of his room and pressed against her,
so that when the father came in from the anteroom he could see straight away that
Gregor had the best of intentions to return to his room at once, and
that it was not necessary to drive him back, only to open the door
had to open, and in a moment he would be gone.

But the father was in no mood to notice such subtleties.
"Ah!" He called as soon as he entered, in a tone as if he were
angry and happy at the same time. Gregor withdrew his head from the door and
raised him against the father. He really didn't have his father like that
imagined how he stood now; however, he had in the last
Time missed the novel crawling around, just as it used to be
to take care of the rest of the apartment, and should have
must be prepared to encounter changed conditions.
Still, anyway, was that still the father? The same man who is tired
Was buried in bed when Gregor used to go on a business trip
was disengaged; who in his dressing gown on his homecoming evenings
Had received an armchair; was not quite able to get up,
but had only raised his arms as a sign of joy, and he was with
the rare walks together on a few Sundays a year and
on the highest holidays between Gregor and his mother, who are already on
and walked slowly for themselves, still a little more slowly, in his
old coat wrapped up, always carefully put on the cane
worked his way forward and almost always when he wanted to say something
stood still and gathered his company around him? But now he was
but well erect; in a tight blue uniform with gold buttons
dressed as servants of the banking institutions wear; above the high
stiff collar of the skirt developed its strong double chin;
the black eyes penetrated under the bushy eyebrows
fresh and attentive; the otherwise disheveled white hair was closed
combed down with a meticulously precise, shining parting hairstyle. He
threw his cap on which a gold monogram, probably the one
Bench, was attached, arched across the whole room towards the sofa
and went with the ends of his long tunic turned back
Hands in his trouser pockets, grimacing toward Gregor. He
Probably did not know what he was up to; at least he raised his feet
unusually high, and Gregor was amazed at the huge size of his
Boot soles. But he didn't stop there, he still knew about it
first days of his new life that his father only met the
considered the greatest severity to be appropriate. And so he ran before his father
stopped when the father stopped and hurried forward again,
if only the father moved. So they made the rounds of that several times
Zimmer, without anything decisive happening, yes without that
Whole the appearance of a chase due to its slow pace
would have had. That's why Gregor stayed on the floor for the time being,
especially since he feared the father might escape onto the walls or the
Hold ceiling for particular malice. However, Gregor had to
say that he couldn't stand even this running for long, because
while the father took a step, he had to take a myriad of
Perform movements. Shortness of breath was already beginning to make itself felt, how
even in his earlier days he did not have a completely trustworthy lung
possessed. As he now stumbled along, to use all his strength for the run
to collect, barely kept his eyes open; in its dullness to one
other salvation than not at all thought through running; and almost already
had forgotten that the walls were free for him, although these were also
carefully carved jagged and pointed furniture
- something flew down right next to him, slightly thrown, and
rolled ahead of him. It was an apple; at once a second flew after him;
Gregor stopped in horror; running on was useless because
the father had decided to bomb him. From the
He had filled his pockets with a bowl of fruit on the sideboard and tossed it
now, without aiming sharply for the time being, apple by apple. These little ones
red apples rolled around on the floor as if electrified and poked
to each other. A weakly thrown apple brushed Gregor's back and slid
but harmlessly. One who flew immediately after it pressed against it
literally in Gregor's back; Gregor wanted to drag himself on than
could the surprising unbelievable pain with the change of location
perish; yet he felt nailed to the ground and stretched himself in
complete confusion of all senses. Only with one last glance did he see
still how the door of his room was thrown open, and before that
screaming sister the mother rushed out in her shirt, because the
Sister had undressed her to allow her to breathe in the swoon
procure, as then the mother ran up to the father and her on the
Away the untied skirts one by one slid to the floor, and
how she tripped over her skirts on her father and him
embracing, in complete union with him - but now Gregors failed
Eyesight - put your hands on the back of your father's head to protect yourself
Gregor's life begged.




III.


The severe wound of Gregor, from which he suffered for over a month - the
Apple remained, since nobody dared to remove it, as a visible souvenir
sitting in the flesh - seemed to have reminded even his father,
that Gregor in spite of his present sad and disgusting figure
was a member of the family who could not be treated like an enemy,
but against which it was the commandment of family duty
Reluctance to swallow and to tolerate, nothing but to tolerate.

And even if Gregor is now also in mobility through his wound
probably lost forever and for the time being to be traversed
of his room like an old invalid took long, long minutes -
creeping on high was out of the question - so he got for
this aggravation of his condition is one in his opinion
Completely sufficient replacement by always having the
Living room door, which he had sharply closed an hour or two beforehand
used to watch, was opened so that he, in the dark of his room
lying down, invisible from the living room, with the whole family
lit tables and see their speeches, in a way with more general
Permission, so very different than before, was allowed to listen.

Of course, it was no longer the lively conversations of the earlier ones
Times that Gregor always remembered with some in the small hotel rooms
Desire had thought when he was tired in the damp bedclothes
have to throw. It was mostly very quiet now. The father slept
soon after dinner in his chair; the mother and sister
exhorted one another to be quiet; the mother sewed far beyond the light
bent over, fine linen for a fashion store; the sister, the one
Having accepted a position as a saleswoman, she learned shorthand that evening
and French, perhaps to find a better post later on
reach. Sometimes the father woke up and as if he didn't know
that he had slept, he said to his mother, "How long have you been today. How long have you been today?"
sewing again! ”and fell asleep again immediately, while Mother and
Sister smiled wearily at each other.

With a kind of attachment, the father refused to take his at home
To take off servant uniform; and while the dressing gown is useless on
The coat hook hung, the father fell asleep fully dressed
his place as if he were always ready and waiting for his service
here on the voice of the superior. As a result, the same lost
Initially not a new uniform despite all the care taken by mother and sister
of cleanliness, and Gregor often looked over at this for whole evenings
and over stained ones, shining with their always polished gold buttons
Dress in which the old man slept most uncomfortably and yet calmly.

As soon as the clock struck ten, the mother looked for him by speaking softly
To wake father and then persuade to go to bed because here was
It wasn't a real sleep after all, and that was what my father had at six
Clock had to start his duty, extremely necessary. But in the stubbornness
which had seized him since he was a servant, he always persisted
on staying at the table longer, even though he was regular
fell asleep, and moreover could only be moved with the greatest effort,
to swap the armchair for the bed. Mother and sister liked it
no matter how hard you penetrate him with small admonitions,
For a quarter of an hour he slowly shook his head, holding his eyes
closed and did not get up. Mother tugged his sleeve, said
Flattering words in his ear, the sister left her job to do the
To help mother, but it didn't work with father. He just sank
deeper in his chair. Only until the women under his armpits
grasped, he opened his eyes, saw alternately mother and mother
Sister and used to say, “This is a life. That is the rest
my old days. "And leaning on the two women, he rose,
awkward, as if he were the greatest burden for himself, let himself go
lead the women to the door, waved them away and left
independently while the mother her sewing kit, the sister hers
He hurriedly threw down the pen in order to run after his father and on to him
to be helpful.

In this worn-out and overtired family, who had time to look around?
Worrying about Gregor more than was absolutely necessary? The household was
more and more restricted; the maid was released after all;
a huge bony waitress with white hair that fluttered around her head
came morning and evening to do the hardest work;
everything else was done by the mother in addition to her sewing work. It
it even happened that various family jewelry, which used to be the
Mother and sister overjoyed with conversations and
Celebrations were sold, like Gregor in the evening
learned from the general discussion of the prices achieved. The largest
But the complaint was always that one had to do this for the present circumstances
could not leave an apartment that was too big, because it was inconceivable
how to move Gregor. But Gregor saw that it was
it wasn't just the consideration for him that was what a move
prevented, because it would have been in a suitable box with one
few air holes can easily carry; what the family
the main deterrent from moving house was rather the complete one
Hopelessness and the thought of having had some misfortune
was beaten like no one else in the whole family and
Circle of acquaintances. What the world asked of poor people, they fulfilled
to the extreme, the father got that for the little bank clerk
Breakfast, the mother sacrificed herself for the laundry of strangers who
Sister ran back and forth behind the desk at the orders of the customers,
but the strength of the family did not reach any further. And the wound
Gregor's back began to hurt like new when Mother and
Sister, after they put the father to bed, well
returned, abandoned work, moved closer together, yes
Sat cheek to cheek; if now the mother, pointing to Gregor's room,
said: "Close the door there, Grete," and when Gregor is back in the
It was dark while the women next door mixed or even mixed their tears
Stared tearlessly at the table.

Gregor spent the nights and days almost entirely without sleep. Once in a while
he thought about the affairs of the next time the door was opened
To take the family back into hand just as in the past; in his
Thoughts reappeared after a long time the boss and the authorized representative,
the clerks and the apprentices, the so conceptual house servant, two
three friends from other businesses, a chambermaid from a hotel
in the provinces, a dear, fleeting memory, a cashier out
a hat shop that he seriously but slowly applied for
had - they all appeared mixed up with strangers or already
Forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family, they were
all inaccessible, and he was glad when they disappeared. But then
was he again in no mood to worry about his family,
he was just angry about poor maintenance, and yet he felt himself
couldn’t imagine anything he would have had an appetite for, he did
Plans how he could get into the pantry to take there,
what owed him, even if he wasn't hungry. Without now
More to think about how to do Gregor a special favor
could, the nurse hurriedly shoved, before going into the morning and noon
Business was going on, walking any food into Gregor's room
in to them in the evening, regardless of whether the food might be
only tasted or - the most common case - was completely untouched
to sweep out with a wave of the broom. Tidying up the room,
what she always took care of in the evenings couldn't be done any faster
be. Streaks of dirt ran along the walls, lay here and there
Tangles of dust and rubbish. In the first time Gregor took part
the arrival of the sister in such particularly significant angles
to reproach her, so to speak, by this position. But he
could have stayed there for weeks without the sister
would have improved; she saw the dirt exactly as he did, but she had
just decided to let him. In doing so, she woke up with one of her
completely new sensitivity that gripped the whole family in general
that she had reserved the tidying up of Gregor's room
stayed. Once Gregor's mother had a major cleaning operation
which she had only managed to do after consuming a few buckets of water
- Gregor was also offended by the amount of moisture and he was lying down
broad, bitter and immobile on the sofa - but the punishment
did not stay away for the mother. Because hardly had the sister in the evening
noticed the change in Gregor's room when she, to the utmost
offended, ran into the living room and, despite the imploringly raised
Hands of the mother, broke out into a crying fit to which the parents - the
Father had been startled out of his chair, of course - first
watched astonished and helpless; until they too began to stir; the
Father on the right reproached his mother for not missing Gregor's room
left to the sister to clean; on the left, on the other hand, the sister
yelled at that she would never be allowed to clean Gregor's room again; while
the mother into the father, who no longer knew each other because of the excitement
Tried to drag the bedroom; the sister, from sobs
shaken, worked the table with her little fists; and Gregor
hissed loudly with anger that it didn't occur to anyone to shut the door
close and spare him this sight and noise.

But even if the sister, exhausted from her job, its
had grown tired of caring for Gregor as he had done before
The mother by no means had to stand up for her and Gregor would have
but need not be neglected. Because now it was
Operator there. This old widow who helped in her long life
her strong bone structure might have survived the worst
no real disgust for Gregor. Without being curious in any way
be, she happened to open the door of Gregor's room once
and was in the sight of Gregor, who, utterly astonished, was nevertheless him
nobody chased, began to run back and forth, hands folded in their laps
stopped in amazement. Since then she has not failed, always fleetingly
Open the door a little in the morning and in the evening and see Gregor
to look inside. At first she called him to her too, with words
which she probably thought was friendly, like "Come over here,
old dung beetle! "or" Look at the old dung beetle! "
Gregor answered speeches with nothing, but stayed up motionless
his place as if the door hadn't been opened at all. You should have
Instead of disturbing him uselessly according to her mood
prefer to give the order to clean his room every day!
Once in the early morning - a heavy rain, maybe already one
Sign of the coming spring, struck the windows - what Gregor,
when the waitress started talking again, that sort of thing
bitter that, as if to attack, he was slow and frail,
turned against her. But instead of being afraid, the operator raised
just up a chair near the door, and how
She stood with her mouth wide open, her intention was clear to her mouth
not to close until the armchair is in her hand on Gregor's back
would knock down. "So you can't go any further?" She asked when
Gregor turned around again and quietly put the chair in the corner
return.

Gregor now ate almost nothing. Only if he happens to be at the
When he passed the prepared food, he took a bite to play with
Mouth, held it there for hours and then usually spat it out again.
At first he thought it was the grief over the state of his room that
keep him from eating, but just with the changes in the room
he made up very soon. One had got used to things that one
could not accommodate anywhere else to put in this room,
and there were many such things now, since one room in the apartment was given
had rented three lodgers. These serious gentlemen - all three
had full beards, as Gregor once discovered through a crack in the door -
were embarrassed about being tidy, not just in their room, but as they were
had rented themselves here, in the whole economy, that is
especially in the kitchen. Useless or even dirty stuff
they did not endure. Moreover, for the most part, they had their own
Brought furnishings. Because of this, there were many things
become superfluous, which were not for sale, but which one
also didn't want to throw it away. All of these went to Gregor's room.
Likewise, the ash box and the waste box from the kitchen. What only
was unusable at the moment, hurled the waitress who always kept it
was in a great hurry, just to Gregor's room; Fortunately, Gregor saw
mostly just the object in question and the hand that held it. the
The operator might have intended to, when and where possible
To bring things back or to throw them all out at once,
in fact, however, they remained where they went through the first
If Gregor wasn't squirming through the junk
and set it in motion, forced at first because there was no other place
was free to crawl, but later with increasing pleasure, although he
after such wanderings, tired and sad to die, again
did not move for hours.

Because the householders sometimes share their dinner at home too
Occupying living room, the living room door stayed on some evenings
closed, but Gregor easily refrained from opening the door,
he didn't have some evenings when it was open
exploited, but was, without the family noticing, in the darkest
Located in the corner of his room. But once the operator had the door
Left a little open to the living room, and it stayed that open, too
when the lodgers came in in the evening and the light was turned on. she
sat up at the table where in earlier times the father who
Mother and Gregor had sat, unfolded the napkins and took them
Knife and fork in hand. Immediately the mother appeared in the doorway
a bowl of meat and just behind her the sister with one
Bowl of piled potatoes. The food steamed with strong
Smoke. The lodgers leaned over those placed in front of them
Bowls as if to test them before eating, and indeed
cut up the one who sat in the middle and the other two as
There seemed to be authority, a piece of meat still on the bowl,
apparently to determine whether it is tender enough and whether it is not about in
the kitchen should be sent back. He was satisfied, and mother
and Sister, who had watched intently, began to breathe a sigh of relief
smile.

The family themselves ate in the kitchen. Even so, the father came before he came in
the kitchen went into this room and made with a single one
Bowing, cap in hand, walking around the table. the
The lodgers all stood up and mumbled something into their beards.
When they were then alone, they ate almost perfectly
Silence. It seemed strange to Gregor that one out of all
the various noises of the food repeatedly chewing their teeth
heard out as if this was to show Gregor that one had teeth
need to eat, and that you can even with the nicest toothless
Pine trees could not do anything. "I have an appetite," said himself
Gregor worried, “but not on these things. How this
Nourish carpenters and I'll perish! "

Especially that evening - Gregor did not remember during the
Heard the violin all along - it came from the kitchen
here. The lodgers had already finished their supper, the middle one
had pulled out a newspaper, given the other two a sheet each,
and now they read, leaning back, and smoking. Than to play the violin
began, they became attentive, got up and went to the
Tip toe to the hall door, in which they are huddled together
stayed. You must have heard her from the kitchen, because the father
exclaimed: “Are the gentlemen uncomfortable with the game? It can be done immediately
"On the contrary," said the middle man,
“The young lady doesn't want to come in and here in the room
play when it's much more comfortable and cozy? "" Oh, please, "cried
the father as if he were the violin player. The gentlemen came into the room
back and waited. Soon the father came with the music stand, the mother
with the notes and the sister with the violin. The sister prepared
play everything quietly; the parents who never used the room
had rented and therefore the courtesy to the lodgers
exaggerated, did not dare to sit in their own armchairs;
the father leaned against the door, his right hand between two buttons of the
closed livre skirt; but the mother received from one
Offered an armchair to Mr. and sat, because she left the armchair wherever
the gentleman had accidentally placed it in a corner to the side.

The sister began to play; Father and mother pursued, each of
his side, attentive to the movements of her hands. Gregor had, from
attracted to the game, ventured a little further and was already with
the head in the living room. He was hardly surprised that he was in the last
Time took so little regard for others; earlier this was
Consideration has been his pride. And he would have more right now
Had reason to hide because of the dust that got into
was everywhere in his room and flew around at the slightest movement
he, too, covered in dust; He dragged threads, hair, and leftover food
with him on his back and sides; his
Indifference to everything was far too great for him to know how
used to be several times during the day, laid on his back and on the carpet
would have chafed. And in spite of this condition, he was not shy about one
Moving forward on the pristine living room floor.

However, nobody paid any attention to him either. The family was entirely dated
Violin playing used; the lodgers, on the other hand, who
first, hands in pockets, much too close behind
The nurse's music stand had been set up so that they could all sit in the
Notes could have seen what must have bothered the nurse, pulled
soon turned to the window with low-pitched conversations with bowed heads
back, where they stayed, watched anxiously by their father. It had now
really the blatant appearance as if they were in their assumption,
to hear a nice or entertaining violin playing would have been disappointing
fed up with the whole performance and just let themselves in out of courtesy
disturb their calm. Especially the way they all come out of their nose and mouth
The smoke from their cigars blew up, causing great nervousness
conclude. And yet the sister played so beautifully. Her face was to
Tilted to the side, scrutinizing and sad, their eyes followed the staves.
Gregor crawled forward a little further and held his head close to him
Ground to possibly meet their eyes. Was he a
Animal, when he was so gripped by music? It was as if the way was showing itself to him
the longed-for unknown food. He was determined to
Sister to advance, to pluck her skirt and thereby her
to suggest that she should come into his room with her violin, because
nobody here paid off the game the way he wanted it to. He wanted her
never let him out of his room, at least not while he was alive;
his frightful figure was to be useful to him for the first time; at all
He wanted to be the doors of his room and the attackers at the same time
hiss at; but the sister should not be forced, but rather
to stay with him voluntarily; she should sit next to him on the sofa
the ear bowed to him, and he would then confide in her that
he had the firm intention of taking her to the Conservatory
send, and that he this, if not the misfortune intervened
last Christmas - Christmas was already over, wasn't it?
- would have told everyone without worrying about any contradiction.
After this explanation, the sister would be in tears of emotion
break out and Gregor would get up to her armpit and hers
Kiss neck she, since she went into the shop, free without ribbon or
Wearing a collar.

"Mr. Samsa!" Shouted the middle man to his father and pointed without a
To lose another word with the index finger on the slowly yourself
moving forward Gregor. The violin fell silent, the middle one
Zimmerherr smiled at his friends and shook his head
then looked at Gregor again. The father seemed to consider it more necessary
hold instead of driving Gregor away, for the time being to the lodgers
calm down, even though they weren't at all excited and Gregor was more excited
when the violin playing seemed entertaining. He rushed to them and looked
pushing her into her room with her arms outstretched and at the same time
to take away the view of Gregor from them with his body. they were
now actually a little angry, one no longer knew whether about that
Behavior of the father or about the knowledge that is now dawning on them,
without knowing it, obsessed with a roommate like Gregor
to have. They asked their father to explain, and they raised their arms for their part,
tugged restlessly at her beards and only slowly gave way to her room
return. In the meantime the sister had lost the feeling that she was after
succumbed to the suddenly stopped game, had overcome, had
after a while in the casually hanging hands violin and
Hold bow and continue to look at the notes as if she were still playing
had, suddenly pulled up, had the instrument on the lap of the
Mother laid in difficulty breathing with heavily working lungs still
was sitting in her armchair, and ran into the next room to which the
Carpenters were already approaching faster under the urging of the father. Man
saw the blankets and pillows under the nurse's trained hands
flew up in the beds and straightened up. Before the gentlemen
had reached the room, she was done with the extra beds and
slipped out. The father seemed so stubborn again
seized that he forgot all respect he still had for his tenants
owed. He just pushed and pushed until already in the door of the room
the man in the middle stamped his foot with a thundering thunder, and thereby the
Brought father to a standstill. "I hereby declare," said he, holding up his hand
and looked at his mother and sister too, “that I
with regard to the ruling in this apartment and family
disgusting conditions «- here he spat upon the
Boden - »Quit my room immediately. I will too, of course
don't pay the slightest for the days I've lived here,
on the other hand, I will still think about whether I should not go with any
- believe me - very easy to justify claims against you
Will appear. ”He paused and looked straight ahead, as if he were expecting
some. In fact, his two friends immediately came to mind with the words:
"We'll give notice immediately, too." Then he took the door handle and
closed the door with a crash.

The father staggered to his chair with fumbling hands and let himself be
fall into; it looked like he was stretching to his usual
An evening nap, but the strong nod of his head as if it were unsteady
showed that he was not sleeping at all. Gregor was there all the time
Lying quietly in the place where the lodgers caught him
had. The disappointment over the failure of his plan, maybe
but also the weakness caused by so much starvation made it
impossible for him to move. He feared with a certain
For the next moment, certainty over a general one
he collapsed and waited. Not even the violin
startled him, who, from under the trembling fingers of his mother,
fell off her lap and made a resounding sound.

"Dear parents," said the sister, and suggested the introduction
Hand on the table, »It can't go on like this. Maybe if you do
do not see, I see it. I don't want that in front of this monster
Say my brother's name and just say: we have to
try to get rid of it. We tried everything humanly possible to do it
cultivate and tolerate, I believe no one can give us the slightest
Make an accusation."

"She is a thousand times right," said the father to himself. The mother who
still couldn't find enough breath, started with an insane
Expression of the eyes dull in the held hand to cough.

The sister hurried to her mother and held her forehead. The father seemed
to be brought to more definite thoughts by the words of the sister,
had sat upright, played with his servant cap between the
Plates that were still on the table from the lodgers' supper
stood and looked at the silent Gregor from time to time.

"We must try to get rid of it," said the sister now
exclusively to the father, because the mother heard nothing in her cough,
“It'll kill you both, I see it coming. If you already like that
Having to work hard, like all of us, you can't do this at home
endure eternal torment. I can't either. ”And so she broke
violently in tears that her tears fell on the mother's face
flowed down, from which she wiped them with mechanical hand movements.

“Child,” said the father, sympathetically and with remarkable understanding, “what
but should we do? "

The nurse just shrugged her shoulders as a sign of perplexity
they now while crying in contrast to their earlier security
had seized.

"If he only understood us," said the father, half questioning; the sister
shook hands violently out of weeping as a sign of that
is not to be thought.

"If he only understood us," repeated the father, closing the door
the sister's conviction of the impossibility of this in the eyes
up, “then an agreement with him might be possible. but
so - «

"It must go away," cried the sister, "that is the only way, father. You
just have to try to get rid of the thought that it is Gregor. That we it
have believed for so long that this is our real misfortune. But how
can it be Gregor? If it were Gregor, he would have long ago
realized that a human coexistence with such an animal
is not possible and would have left voluntarily. We would have then
no brother, but could live on and honor his memory
keep. But as it is, this animal pursues us, drives away the lodgers,
apparently wants to take the whole apartment and us on the street
let us stay overnight. Look, father, "she suddenly cried out," he
starts all over again! ”And all in one for Gregor
incomprehensible horror left the sister even the mother, pushed
literally moves away from her chair, as if she would rather want her mother
sacrificing than staying near Gregor, and hurried behind his father, who,
just aroused by their behavior, also got up and arms like to
The sister's protection was half raised in front of her.

But it never occurred to Gregor, anyone, let alone his
Wanting to scare sister. He had just started himself
turning around to wander back to his room, and that took away
however noticeably because he was suffering as a result of his condition
had to help the difficult turns with his head, which he had to
lifted and hit the ground many times. He stopped and looked
around. His good intentions seemed to have been recognized; it was only
been an instant horror. Now everyone saw him in silence
and sad at. The mother lay with her legs stretched out and
pressed together in her chair, her eyes fell from weariness
almost to; the father and sister sat next to each other, the sister
had put her hand around her father's neck.

"Now maybe I can turn around," thought Gregor and began
his work again. He couldn't gasp from the exertion
and had to rest here and there. Otherwise urged him
no one either, it was all up to him. When he did the turn
When he finished, he immediately began walking straight back. He
marveled at the great distance that separated him from his room,
and didn’t understand how he had been weak a short time ago
had traveled the same way, almost without noticing it. Always only
anxious to crawl quickly, he scarcely paid attention to the fact that not a word
no exclamation from his family bothered him. Only when he was in the door
he turned his head, not, completely, for he felt his neck stiff
at least he could see that nothing had changed behind him
only the sister got up. His last look grazed
the mother, who was now completely asleep.

As soon as he was inside his room, the door was hurriedly shut,
bolted and locked. About the sudden noise behind you
Gregor got so frightened that his legs buckled. It was that
Sister who was in such a hurry. She was already there upright
stood and waited, then she was light-footed
jumped forward, Gregor hadn't heard her coming, and one
"Finally!" She called to her parents while she was holding the key in the lock
turned around.

"And now?" Asked Gregor, looking around in the dark. He made
soon the discovery that he could no longer move at all.
He was not surprised at that; rather it struck him as unnatural that he should
had actually moved with these thin legs until now
can. Otherwise he felt relatively comfortable. He had
Pain all over his body, but it seemed to him that it was gradually increasing
weaker and weaker and would eventually perish altogether. The
rotten apple in his back and the inflamed area that whole
was covered in soft dust, he hardly felt it. To his family
he thought back with emotion and love. His opinion about him
had to disappear was possibly even more decisive than his
Sister. In this state of empty and peaceful reflection remained
until the tower clock struck the third hour in the morning. The beginning of the
He still saw the general brightening outside the window. then
His head sank completely without his will, and out of his own
His last breath streamed weakly from his nostrils.

When the operator came early in the morning - out of sheer strength and haste
hit her no matter how often she was asked to avoid it,
all doors shut so that in the whole apartment from their arrival
no more peaceful sleep was possible - she found with her usual
short visit to Gregor at first nothing special. She thought he was lying
deliberately so immobile and play the offended; she trusted
all possible sense to him. Because she happened to have the long broom in
holding the hand, she tried to tickle Gregor with him from the door.
When there was no success either, she got angry and broke in
little into Gregor, and only when she found him without any resistance from
had pushed her into his place, she became attentive. When she soon the
recognized the true facts, made her eyes wide, whistled to herself,
But did not stay long, but tore the door of the bedroom
up and called out into the darkness in a loud voice: “Just look
on, it died; there it lies, completely dead! "

The Samsa couple sat upright in their double bed and had to do that
To get over the horror of the operator before it came to hers
To understand the message. But then Mr. and Mrs. Samsa each rose
on his side, hurriedly out of bed, Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his
Shoulders, Frau Samsa only came out in her nightgown; so they stepped in
Gregor's room. In the meantime the door of the living room was also closed
open, in which Grete slept since the householders moved in; she was
fully dressed, as if she hadn't slept at all, even her pale one
Face seemed to prove it. "Dead?" Said Mrs. Samsa and looked inquiringly
to the operator, despite the fact that she checks everything herself and even without it
Examination could recognize. "I mean that," said the operator and
to prove Gregor's corpse hit another large piece with the broom
sideways. Mrs. Samsa made a movement as if she wanted the broom
hold back, but didn't. “Well,” said Mr Samsa, “you can now
we thank God. ”He crossed himself and the three women followed his
Example. Grete, not taking an eye from the corpse, said: “Look
just how skinny he was. He hasn't had anything for a long time
eaten. As soon as the food came in, it is again
Indeed, Gregor's body was completely flat and
dry, you actually only recognized that now that he was no longer of
the legs were lifted and nothing else distracted the gaze.

"Come in to us, Grete, for a while," said Mrs. Samsa
a wistful smile, and Grete went, not without, after the corpse
looking back behind the parents in the bedroom. The operator
closed the door and fully opened the window. Despite the early
In the morning, the fresh air was already mixed with a bit of a temper. It was
at the end of March.

The three lodgers stepped out of their room and looked astonished
after their breakfast at; they had been forgotten. "Where is that
Breakfast? ”The middle man asked the waitress sullenly.
But she put her finger to her mouth and then hastily waved and
silently to the gentlemen, they would like to come into Gregor's room. she
also came and then stood, hands in the pockets of their something
worn skirt, in the now very bright room around Gregors
Corpse around.

Then the door of the bedroom opened and Mr. Samsa appeared in
his livery, his wife on one arm, his daughter on the other. All
were a little weeping; Sometimes Grete pressed her face to her arm
dad's.

"Leave my apartment immediately!" Said Mr Samsa and pointed
the door without letting the women go. "What do you mean?" Said
the man in the middle a little dismayed and smiled sweetly. The two
others kept their hands behind their backs and kept rubbing them
to each other, as if in joyful anticipation of a great quarrel, but that
had to be favorable for them. “I mean it exactly as I mean it
say, ”replied Mr. Samsa, walking in line with his two
Escorts to the carpenter. At first he stood still and
looked at the floor as if things were changing into a new one in his head
Put together order. "So let's go then," he said then, and looked
to Mr Samsa as if he were asking for something that suddenly came over him
Humility even a new approval for this decision. Mr. Samsa
Just nodded briefly to him several times with wide eyes. Then he went
Herr actually at once with long strides into the anteroom; his two
Friends had been with very steady hands for a while
listened up and jumped after him now, as if in fear, sir
Samsa could enter the anteroom before them and connect with
disturb their guide. In the anteroom all three took off their hats
Clothes racks, pulled their sticks out of the stick container, bowed
mute and left the apartment. In one, as it turned out, entirely
Mr. Samsa stepped on with the two women with unfounded suspicion
Forecourt outside; Leaning against the railing, they watched the three of them
Gentlemen slowly but constantly descended the long stairs, in
each floor in a certain bend in the stairwell
disappeared and after a few moments came out again; ever
The deeper they got, the more the family lost interest
Samsa for them, and as against them and then high above them
Butcher journeyman with the stretcher on his head in a proud posture
went up, soon Mr. Samsa left the railing with the women, and
they all returned to their apartment, as if relieved.

They decided to rest and go for a walk today
use; Not only did they deserve this break, they deserved it
they even absolutely needed them. And so they sat down at the table and
wrote three letters of apology, Mr. Samsa to his management,
Mrs. Samsa to her client, and Grete to her principal. While
the operator came in after writing to say she was leaving,
for her morning work was over. The three writers nodded first
only, without looking up, only when the waitress still doesn't know
wanted to remove, you looked up angrily. "Well?" Asked Mr Samsa. the
The operator stood smiling in the doorway, as if she had one of the family
to report great luck but will only do so if thoroughly
will be queried. The almost upright little ostrich feather on her hat,
which Mr. Samsa was annoyed with during her entire service,
swayed slightly in all directions. “So what do you want
actually? ”asked Mrs. Samsa, in front of which the operator was still on
had the most respect. "Yes," replied the operator and was able to advance
don't go on with a friendly laugh, »about how that
If you want to move stuff next door, you don't have to worry
do. It's all right. ”Frau Samsa and Grete leaned over
down their letters as if they wanted to go on writing; Mr. Samsa,
who noticed that the waitress was now describing everything in detail
wanted to begin, fought it off with an outstretched hand. There
but she was not allowed to tell, she remembered the great hurry,
who she had called out obviously offended: "Adjes all sides," turned
wildly and left the apartment, slamming the door terribly.

"She'll be released in the evening," said Mr Samsa, but got neither from
an answer from his wife and his daughter, because the operator
seemed to have disturbed her barely regained calm. You raised
each other, went to the window and stayed there, hugging each other.
Mr Samsa turned to them in his chair and watched
she quietly for a while. Then he called out, “So come here. Let it go
finally the old things. And also show a little consideration for me. "
The women immediately followed him, hurried to him, caressed him and
quickly finished their letters.

Then all three left the apartment together, which they already did
Hadn't done it for months, and took the electric into the
Free in front of the city. The car in which they sat alone was made entirely of
shining through the warm sun. They discussed, comfortably in their seats
leaned back, the prospects for the future, and it was found that
on closer inspection these were by no means bad, because all of them
three jobs were what they hadn't really thought about each other
had asked, extremely cheap and especially for later
very promising. The greatest immediate improvement in the situation must have occurred
can of course easily result from a change of residence; they wanted
now a smaller and cheaper one, but better located and generally
Take a more practical apartment than the present one from Gregor
was chosen. While they were talking like that, it fell to Mr. and Mrs.
Ms. Samsa almost at the sight of her daughter, who is getting livelier and livelier
at the same time one, as she lately despite all the care that
had pale her cheeks for a beautiful and voluptuous girl
flourished. Becoming quieter and almost unconsciously by looking at oneself
Understanding, they thought that it would now be time for one too
good man to look for her. And it was like confirmation to them
of their new dreams and good intentions when at the destination of their journey the
Daughter first rose and stretched her young body.